So, in the previous session we have learned how
to list the packages. So, we have used a command
called dpkg query, which allowed us to combine
the various fields to output them onto the screen
and we have seen a list of packages that
is coming onto the screen. And we have
used the grep to pick up and we can actually now
modify that to a little bit further extent.
So, I am just going to run the same query, so
minus W to provide information about the packages
and minus f to provide the pattern. So, I have
the section I would like to have and then one
space and then the name of the package has to
be shown, and after that I would like to have
the newline character and then now you see that
this list is quite long. And here is where we
would like to use the grep features.
So, let us say I use the extended
regular expression engine, and I would like
to look at all those package names which have
exactly four characters. So, W get is a package
name with four characters, n map is a package name
with four characters. So, I want to pick up those
kinds of package names. So, how do I provide the
pattern? So, I would actually have space because
the package name is coming after the space.
So, I do not want to match those which are
in the section, only in the package I would
like to match. And then I do not know what
character has to be matched, so I put a dot.
So, any character can be there, but that
should occur exactly four times. And after
the package name has been given, I should go to
the end of the line. So, the dollar will tell me
that it is going to be end of the line.
So, now look at that and you see that we
are getting package names which are exactly four
characters long. And what happens if I do not have
the dollar there. You see that it would match
four characters, but the remaining characters
are also present which are not being looked at.
So, by putting the dollar here we are insisting
that the package name should have been
finished in just four characters.
And what is the blank here for, so I would
actually also show you what happens if you
do not have the blank here. You would see that
the matching is occurring also in the name of the
section so that I do not want. So, I put a blank
here so that it is matching from the second field
onwards and then it is matching only in the name
of the package and the dollar is actually matching
only the end of the line to be occurring after
four characters of the name of the package.
Now, let us say I would like to have the
name of the package to be starting with g
and the three characters after that, so g
something, something, something. Now, you see
that this is giving us the package names which
starts with the g and are four later words, gmp
or grep or gzip or gftp etc. And we could
also look at, after g I can have either 1
or up to let us say 5 characters.
And you see that slightly a longer list of g
starting packages are there, g plus plus onwards
all the way up to guake terminal which we have
looked at in one of the earlier classes. So,
you could see that the egrep can be used in a
very powerful manner to process the matching of
the string precisely telling what character you
would like to match and how many times etc.
Now, let us say you would like to have all those
packages which are coming under
the category called mathematics.
So, that you want to go through those packages
and be thorough of it. So, let us look at that.
Math should be matched within the name of the
package. Now, you see that it is matching also
names of packages here, but not only sections.
Now, I want to match it only for the section.
So which means that I want the math character
set to should be only in the beginning of the
line. So already we know the anchor for
that. So I put the hat in the front.
And now you see that only those packages
which come under the section called math
are being displayed, but not the names
of packages which have math in middle
but actually belonging to some other section. So,
you see the utility of the egrep along with the
features such as the hat as well as the number
of times the particular character should come
so that you can actually precisely pick up the
lines of output that you are interested in.
Now, there are some packages which are coming
from the kde graphical user interface of
Ubuntu and the default GUI for Ubuntu is
gnome. So, you can look at those also here. So,
k and after that I have something that
starts with k and then a dollar. So,
packages that starts with k. And there are many
of them. So, I think that k is not sufficient,
kd. So, now this is much better,
kde is common desktop environment
and there are some packages that are coming.
So, kdenlive is like an editor used to trim the
videos etc., which is what I do for our course.
And there are also other tools. So, these are
coming from a common desktop environment, which
requires some other libraries also to be present
compared to the gnome user interface. So, you
think about what way you want to pick up and
analyze the pattern that would capture them
accurately. And if you have used the thermal
colors enabled then you can also find out what
has been matched and that would also help you
understand the pattern matching better.
Now, there are some features that are available
in the grep which help you with respect to the
type of character sets that can be matched,
so alphabetic, alphanumeric, digits etc. So,
we will look at them using a file in which I
have put intentionally some punctuation marks or
control characters. How do we insert non-typable
characters in a text file is something that
we will learn when we come to the text editors
shortly, but for now I will just display the text
file to you and then we will see how we can pick
specific lines from it depending upon the type
of character set that we would like to match.
So, here is a file that I have in place. So,
character types, I have got lines in which
we have got various strings. So, I have got
a beginning of the line with something and
ending also with something intentionally so that
those strings will be matched appropriately. So,
I have got a lower letter, lowercase letter, I
have got uppercase letter, I have got a digit,
and then I also have a non-printable character
like Ctrl + C. And here also there is a tab
character that has been used and so on. And there
is a blank space here in front of it. So, and then
there is an empty line also in the middle.
So, let us see how we can pick these lines by
using the character sets which come with a
double square bracket and colons separating
the name of the character set that we are
using. So, in all of them I will use the same
pattern where we will use a cat chartypes
pipe grep. Now, let us use this pattern.
Here we would like to let us say pick alphabetic
characters. So, any line that would have an
alphabetical character would be matched, and
you see that all the lines will be matched,
except the blank line, because the bank line
has nothing in it, so that has been skipped.
Next, the alphanum, that is lines which
would have alphanumeric characters will be
matched. And you see that it is the same output
as the previous one. And it has also skipped
the empty line because it has no alphanumeric
character that can be matched on that line.
Now, let us say I would like to have the
alphabetical character in the beginning of
the string. Now, you see that only some of the
lines are showing up. So, if you see hello and
then l and capital L these are getting matched
because they have an alphabetical character at the
beginning, but the remaining lines do not have. It
has 5 and it has a 4 and this fellow has a control
c and there is a empty character here null and
this is a comma here and there is a blank. So,
none of them are actually alphabetical
characters, so they are all skipped.
Now, you could also ask for the alphabetical
character to be at the end of the
line. And you will see that only some of the lines
are being shown, the one with a g, capital H and a
small h. The remaining lines are not shown because
here it is a 2 which is a digit, and here it is a
tab character and here it is a dot and here there
is a null and here there is an equal to sign, and
here again, there is a control character.
So the all of those have been skipped.
And we have got only the first three lines
which have an alphabetical character in the end.
So, you now see that alphabetical character can be
matched either at the beginning or anywhere in the
line or at the end and you need to be watchful
which ones are suitable for your purpose.
Now, we can also look at the alphanumeric
character at the beginning of the line.
And you see that it captures a little bit more
number of lines. So, the first character can
be either an alphabetical or a numeric one, but
not a space or a null or a punctuation mark or
a control character. So, those lines have been
skipped, the remaining ones have been shown.
Now, you could also ask for an alphanumerical
character at the end of a line.
And you see that again those have g or H or small
h or 2 are being shown, but the once which control
character or a punctuation or a null or a equal
to sign, etc., they are all being skipped.
You can now look for lines that contain digits
anywhere in the line. And you could also ask
the digit should be at the beginning of the
line or it should be at the end of the line.
So, you could see that when you do not provide any
anchor, it would match anywhere in the line. So,
here the 5 is somewhere in the middle of the
line, here it is in the beginning of the line. And
in the case you provide an anchor with the hat, it
means it has to be matched only in the beginning
of the line. So, the 5g and 42 are being matched.
And when you say end of the line as an anchor,
then only the 42 line will be shown as matched
line from the file chartypes dot txt.
Now, there are some control characters that I have
placed in this file. And we could see whether you
could pick the lines that contain the control
characters. And you see that these are the three
lines. So here I have got a tab character and
here I have got a control c sitting here and here
also I have got a control character sitting in the
front. So, those three lines only have been picked
up. Now, you could ask a reverse question saying
that I do not want any control character.
Now, you could also ask that you would like
to have only the lines which do not contain
the control character and the minus v option
would actually give you the opposite effect
where the lines that are not matching are
shown. And you see that the remaining lines
include the empty line are being shown.
Now, you could also look for any punctuation
characters to be matched.
So, let us look at that punct
would match for all punctuation characters. So,
all those lines which have punctuation characters,
colon is one of the punctuation characters, so
that has been matched nicely. And almost every
line has that except the empty line, so empty
line has been skipped. So, now I give an anchor
at the beginning of the line.
So, only those lines at the beginning
contain a punctuation mark will be shown. So,
we have got a comma there in the first, this
line here so that has been matched. And you could
also ask for a line that ends with a punctuation
and you see that the ones with have a dot and
the equal to sign have been matched. So, the
punctuation marks without specifying what those
marks are can also be used as a character set.
Now, the case of the character also can be used.
So, if I want to have matching lines that contain
only, that contain lower case characters, so you
would see that all the lines except the empty line
are being shown because they all contain some
lowercase letters. And I would put an anchor here
to show that the lowercase characters should be
matched at the beginning of the line. And so the
hello and l will be getting matched there with
a capital, with a small h and l and I could give
an anchor to indicate that I want the matching
to be done at the end and the 5g line and the h
in the end will be matched because they contain a
lowercase character at the end of the string.
You could also look at the same kind of
analysis using the uppercase characters.
So, all those lines which contain any uppercase
character will be displayed and you see that
we do not have uppercase characters used
very much so only three lines are used. So,
you have got a capital H here, capital L here and
capital C here. So, only three lines have been
matched. And I will put an anchor here.
So, only the ones which have a starting
with an uppercase character will be shown.
So, capital L is getting matched there.
And I put a dollar here and remove
the hat. So, I get a matching
where the ending of the line will be a
capital letter that would be the capital H.
So, now you see that you could also specify
the matching pattern using a character set
that contains the uppercase characters.
The alphanumerical characters as well as
the punctuation marks are combined together as
printable characters, because they can display
on the screen and the control characters are
then avoided. So, you can actually use the class,
character class called print to indicate that you
would like to match only printable characters.
And when you want to display you would see that
every line except the blank line has been matched,
because except the blank line every other line
has some printable characters or other.
Now, you could also ask for a printable
character to be at the beginning of the line.
And you would see that those lines which
have a control character in the beginning
have been skipped. Then you could also ask for the
printable character to be the end of the line. And
you see that some of the lines which contain a
control character at the end are skipped.
So, here, for example, here there is a control
character at the end that has been skipped. And
here there is a control character in the beginning
and that has been kept because the printable
character is matched only in the end and therefore
in the beginning can be anything else.
Now, there are some characters which give you
a blank space like a space character or a tab
character, so they can also be matched. So,
these are the whitespace characters. And you
would see that except the empty line,
all the lines contain some whitespace
or other and that has been matched.
And you could also ask for the anchor
to show that in the beginning or to show that in
the end. So, you see that there is a blank space
that is available at the beginning or at the end
of these two lines so they are being shown, but
the remaining lines have the blank space somewhere
in the middle so those are being picked up.
Now, there is a character case called space
that can also be used to pick up lines that
contain some whitespace. And you could also ask
for it to have the beginning with the whitespace
or the end with this whitespace. Now, this is
not very different from the blank space except
that there are more whitespace characters than
what we have used. And you can see what type
of a whitespace that is allowed for your input
file and accordingly filter them out using the
difference between these two character sets.
Now, the counter class called graph is used to
match any non-space character. So, you can
see that it, every line except the blank
line has some character which is not a space and
therefore that is getting matched here. And you
could then have that as an anchor in the front.
And you could see that those lines that contain
any non-space character are
being displayed in the front.
So, some of them which contain a control C that
has been skipped here, a blank that has been
skipped here, so the
remaining ones only are there,
only the remaining ones are being displayed. And I
could also put an anchor at the end and you would
see that the lines that contain a blank space at
the end are skipped. So, a non-space character
is tolerated at the end of the line.
Now, let us say we would like to skip
all the empty lines. So that
can be done using this option.
So, what happens is that the matching lines for
the two anchor characters side by side would
give empty lines and minus we would say that do
not print that, print whatever does not match the
empty line. So, the non-empty lines are getting
printed out now. And the empty lines if you want
to print, there is nothing funny about it just
an empty line. So, that is not very useful.
But the with the minus v option, you could
actually remove the empty lines from an input
string, input stream and that is quite useful
in processing where you expect something to be
there on the line and you do not want to have
empty lines coming in. So, you could use this
feature of minus v, and then the two anchors
side by side for the beginning and the end,
so that you skip empty lines.
Time to time we are expected to pick up patterns
from a given text file and then analyze them if
they correspond to certain fields. So, now let
us look at an example file and see whether we can
pick up such patterns using the grep command.
So, here I am providing a random piece of text
which contains certain patterns. So, as we know,
the Aadhar card numbers have about 12 digits.
So, I am giving that as one example in one line.
And then the pin codes usually have six digits
so that of IIT Madras is a six digit one, 600036.
There is no other location in Chennai that uses
the same pin code. So, I am giving that as one
example. And then the phone numbers for mobile
phones are 10 digit and without the country code
or the zero for a city dialing the landline
numbers also are 10 digits for the cities.
So, I am giving that as an example.
The roll numbers in IIT for regular students
are following the pattern where the first two
letters correspond to the department code.
And then the two digits correspond to the year
of joining. And then there is a program code
which is in one letter followed by three digits
corresponding to the roll number within the class.
And it is not necessary that we need to give the
URLs of our websites with the protocol like HTTPS
or HTTP, but if you just give a string where there
is a dot and on either sides of the dot there is
a word which is alphanumeric, then that is also a
valid URL. And you would have seen on your mobile
phone that such strings are automatically
made clickable and they could also be,
and they could be interpreted as URLs.
So, now, let us see whether we can pick these
numbers from this text using the grep command.
Now, it would not work if any of these are
spanning across two lines, because grep would use
only one line at a time for processing. But with
that limitation very quickly we can actually put
the grep knowledge that we have earned till now
to some good use already.
So, first, I would like to pick up the numbers
which are having exactly 12 digits long so that
the other card could come out of the text. So, I
would like to always keep printing the original
text so that it is useful for you. So, egrep
and then the pattern will be given. The pattern
should be such that any digit should be matched
and it should have exactly 12 occurrences. So,
12 occurrences should be there. And you see that
we have identified the Aadhar card as a
matching pattern within the first line. So,
no other line is getting displayed. So, that
means that there is no confusion there.
Now, let us say we would like to pick up the pin
code. So, now you see that pin code is six digit,
so I want to pick those numbers that contain
six digits. Now, you see that there is a
problem here. It is actually picking up numbers
which are matching six digits of the Aadhar card
as well as for the phone number.
Now, how do I pick only the six digits
and not more or not less, and that can be done
using the word boundary. So, now, let us say that
before and after the six digits, there must be
a word boundary. And now you see that it would
actually identify only the line that corresponds
to the pin code. The phone number and the Aadhar
card are not coming because they do not have a
word boundary after the six digits are matched.
Now, I would like to identify what looks like a
roll number. Now, you see that the roll number
is actually a mix of both alphabetical as
well as the digits. So, it is a bit painful.
Now, alphanumerical characters of that particular
length can also be tried out let us do that.
So, let us try out the
alphanumerical characters alnum
and we see that it is actually having
a length of eight. So, I put an 8 here.
So, any eight character long alphanumerical string
would be matched and you see that is actually not
working out, because it is matching given regular
words which do not have specific digits. Now, no
point even asking for a word boundary because word
boundary would also catch words which are exactly
eight characters long so even that does not work.
So, we need some other strategy that is where
the character set that we have discussed would
come off use. So, now let us try that out.
So, what we would do is that we would
use a word boundary and then the
alphabetical characters should occur exactly
two times following by that a digit has to come
exactly two times and then an
alphabetical character has to come,
and after that again a digit has to come exactly
three times, after that there is again a word
boundary. So, you see that the pattern when you
type it is quite long, but it is quite logical.
What we are doing is I am
asking for a word boundary,
after that I am asking for an alphabetical
character coming exactly twice, and then I am
asking for a digit that comes exactly twice, and
then again an alphabetical character, only one,
and then I have got a digit that comes exactly
thrice, after that again a word boundary.
So, this is a pattern that we are giving and you
see that it identifies exactly the roll number and
nothing else. So, by carefully using the character
sets, we can actually identify the pattern of the
string that we are trying to pick up. Now,
for the URLs also we can actually use the
same kind of a strategy. What is the strategy?
So, you know that the protocols are not necessary
to be used now. Even the names like this also
are possible. So, what we would do is as follows.
And then a alphanumeric character
can come any number of times, but not
zero, after that a dot has to come, but
the dot has to be also escaped. And again
alphanumerical character can be there and that
also has to come once or more, but definitely
not zero times and then the word boundary.
So, you see now that it identifies the two URLs
quite nicely. And so you can see that the usage
of the word boundary here and then the plus sign
which is available in the extended regular
expression engine under egrep and then the
backslash to escape the meaning of the
dot so that the dot is matched as it is,
and then again, a word boundary to signal that
is at the end of a particular word would actually
help you in identifying the URLs quite easily.
Now, I have used only alphanumerical characters.
Underscore is also an allowed character. So, you
can actually expand the scope of this matching
to include every possible URL that can come in
a random text that you are not expecting.
Now, time to time, there is a need for us to trim
a text from the top to the bottom or sideways. So,
top to bottom, we have already learned how to
trim by using the command a head and tail. So,
the top end lines of a text file can be picked
up using the head command, the bottom end lines
can be picked up using the tail command. But what
about trimming the text from the left and right
where we can use either the number of
fields or the number of characters.
So, for that, there is a function that is
available. So, the command is called cut.
So, when you use man cut, you
would see that it is enabling
a horizontal trimming of the lines and that
is used to remove sections from each of the
files and it is going line by line. And it can
actually trim using either the characters or
fields, but for any field you also need
to know what is the character used for the
delimiter so minus d option also has to be
there. And the default is tab, but you can
provide any other delimiting character.
So, now I have prepared a simple text file
using which we can actually start trimming
to understand the usage of the cut command.
So, fields dot txt is a simple three line file
in which I have got fields like this. So, 1, 2,
3, 4 and then a semicolon, after that hello world
has a blank, after that there is a comma. So,
you can see that you could use the semicolon or
the comma or the blank space as a field separator,
and you can also use the number of characters as a
way to cut. So, now let us go and inspect the how
the cut command can be done.
Now, it can be used both ways. So,
you can actually use cut fields dot
txt and then you can actually give some
options how to cut, so minus c is the number of
characters and 1 to 4 tells you that from 1 to 4
characters from the beginning should be taken out
and displayed. So you can see that the first four
characters have been taken out and displayed.
Now, you could also say that I want from
5 to 8 and I have got the next four
characters coming on the screen.
Now, this does not pay attention to what was the
field. It just goes as a series of characters and
picks up the character sequence that you want so
1 to 4 or 5 to 8 or whatever. And if you do not
specify the initial part, it will actually assume
that you are going to have the, from the beginning
okay. And if you do not specify the ending, it
will also assume that you want it till the end.
So, the option is there for the hyphen either the
left side of the hyphen or the right hand side of
the hyphen can be can be provided. If you provide
both then it will be indicating as a range.
Now, let us use a delimiter to pick up some of the
fields. So, let us use it as a piped command. So,
cut can take the input from a pipe. So, we will do
that now. And let us use the delimiter as a space.
So, now you will see that if I use the delimiter
as a space, then this will be the first
field and this is the second field. Now,
I want to print only the first field.
Now, you see that it comes out quite nicely.
And the length of each of these fields need
not be same. So which means that when the
number of characters is not what is uniform,
but the way the characters are
separated is what is uniform,
then using space as a delimiter you can pick
the first field. You can also pick the second
field and you see that the second half of
the text is coming up onto the screen.
Now, if you want both, you can also
get it. So, then you have got both the,
entire lines coming up, so that is actually not
meaningful in this case. But in some situations
where there are more than two fields, then you
can actually take part of those fields also.
Now, let us use the semicolon as a delimiter. And
you would see that when I use semicolon, then the
first field is this number, the second field is a
string that contains a comma also in between. So,
let us check that out. And you see that only the
numbers are coming when I asked the first field.
And when I asked the second field, I am
getting the string, and then the comma. So,
this is quite nice. You can change the delimiter
and cut fields as per the delimiter, and pick up
only those fields that you would like to have.
So, similarly, we can actually also use comma as a
delimiter. And you see that when I have comma as
a delimiter, the second field will contain the
line number. So, I would like to take the second
field, and you see only the line numbers are being
displayed here, because after the comma, this is
the second field, this is the second field. And if
you want the first field before the comma, the
rest of it actually is coming onto the screen,
which actually does not have the
same length for each of the lines.
So, the comma, the semicolon, the space or
the tab, all of these can be used as field
separators. So, look at the input stream once
with your own eyes to see what is the delimiter
that was used by the program which is
throwing that particular stream at you.
And then once you understand, you can go ahead and
use the cut command to pick the fields that you
want without having to tell the original developer
to provide them as you like so you can just cut
and take what you need from the output stream.
Now, you can also combine the streams
by piping them multiple times. Let us say I
would like to pick only the string in between
the semicolon and the comma, so what I will
do is I will use semicolon as the first field
separator and then comma as a second
time. So, let us look at that now.
So, I want to pick only this part. So what
I would do is, I would say cat fields,
then cut the minus delimiter, I would first use
this, and take the first field, and then I would
use comma as the delimiter, and again take the
first field. So, second field for the semicolon
as delimiter because I want the second half of
it and then after that I will separate using the
comma and then I will take the first half of it.
So, that is what I am meaning by this command.
And you see that I am getting the string that is
exactly between the semicolon and the comma.
So, now, this is actually not bothering about
anything else. So, you can also achieve this
to some extent using grep also. But in this
case we are looking at the text in a slightly
different manner. We are looking at as a set of
fields that are separated and picking the fields
which is slightly different way of looking
at than a grep command. But we can also try
to see whether the grep would work to give the
same result. So, let us try that out now.
And you see that the grep command was able to
match exactly the part that you would like to
match. Now, but you have not cut it off. So,
you have not yet trimmed the rest of it off.
For the trimming part, you can
pass on the output of the grep to
said command which we would learn in the
future classes, but for now you can see
that you can also identify the string that you
want by using pattern matching quite well. But
the cut command is very useful because you can
actually remove that portion and then go on to
look at the output in a way that you would like
to parse it with any other tool later on.
Now, you could actually combine the concept
of cutting the text from left and right using
the cut command and then the head and tail to
actually cut the lines from the top and the bottom
to pick a particular entry from the input
string. So, let us try that out and I want
to pick up only the welcome command line as
the text. So, what I would do is, I will cut
it from the left and right first and after that
top and bottom. So, let us look at that now.
So, here I am getting the three lines. Now,
I would like to only have the second line.
So, I would do like this, head minus n and then
two lines. The top two lines are being picked up.
And in the top two lines I want the last line. So,
I would pick the last line coming out. And now you
see that I have picked up exactly the string
welcome command line coming on to the screen
and I have used many, many commands here.
So, I have catinated the contents of the file
fields dot text and I have cut it using the field
separator semicolon and picked up the second field
and after that I have again cut it using the comma
as a field separator and pick the first field
and after that I have picked up the top two
lines and then from those top two lines I
have taken the bottom most line and then displayed
it and we have got the string that we wanted.
So, you can actually combine
the commands in various ways to
get the output that you are interested. And it
is up to our imagination to find the easiest way.
And of course the most elegant way
would be when we are experts in
all these commands for which a lot of practice
is required. So, keep practicing various
of these commands and be thorough with
regular expressions so that you make the
best use of the tools that are available
in the Linux command line environment.